Update congestion control documentation (#2097)
iotaledger/goshimmer: documentation/docs/protocol_specification/components/congestion_control.md

image: /img/protocol_specification/congestion_control_algorithm_infographic_new.png
keywords:

- node
- congestion control algorithm
- honest node
- message
- access mana
- malicious nde
- scheduling

---

# Congestion Control

Every network has to deal with its limited intrinsic resources in bandwidth and node capabilities (CPU and
storage). In this document, we present a congestion control algorithm to regulate the influx of messages in the
network to maximize throughput (messages/bytes per second) and minimize delays. Furthermore, the
following requirements must be satisfied:

* __Consistency__: If an honest node writes a message, it should be written by all honest nodes within some
  delay bound.
* __Fairness__: Nodes can obtain a share of the available throughput depending on their access Mana. Throughput is
  shared in a way that an attempt to increase the allocation of any node necessarily results in the decrease
  in the allocation of some other node with an equal or smaller allocation (max-min fairness).
* __Security__: Malicious nodes shall be unable to interfere with either of the above requirements.

> [![Congestion Control](/img/protocol_specification/congestion_control_algorithm_infographic_new.png)](/img/protocol_specification/congestion_control_algorithm_infographic_new.png)

Reviewer: if the old images aren't used anywhere we could delete them to avoid clutter.

## Detailed Design

The algorithm has three core components:

* A scheduling algorithm that ensures fair access for all nodes according to their access Mana.
* A TCP-inspired algorithm for decentralized rate setting to utilize the available bandwidth efficiently while
  preventing large delays.
* A buffer management policy to deal with malicious flows.

### Prerequirements

* __Node identity__: The congestion control module requires node accountability. Each message is associated with the node ID of its issuing
  node.

* __Access mana__: The congestion control module knows the access Mana of the network nodes to share the available
  throughput fairly. Without access Mana, the network would be subject to Sybil attacks, which would incentivize actors
  to artificially split (or aggregate) onto multiple identities.

* __Message weight__. The weight of a message is used to prioritize messages over the others, and it is calculated
  based on the type and length of a message.

### Outbox Buffer Management

Once a message has successfully passed the message parser checks, is solid and booked, it is enqueued into the outbox

> buffer for scheduling. The outbox is split into several queues, each one corresponding to a different node issuing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
buffer for scheduling. The outbox is split into several queues, each corresponding to a different node issuing
```

messages. The total outbox buffer size is limited, but individual queues do not have a size limit. This section
describes the operations of message enqueuing and dequeuing into and from the outbox buffer.

The enqueuing mechanism includes the following components:

* __Classification__: The mechanism identifies the queue where the message belongs according to the node ID of
  the message issuer.
* __Message enqueuing__: The message is actually enqueued, the queue is sorted by message timestamps in increasing order
  and counters are updated (e.g., counters for the total number of bytes in the queue).

The dequeuing mechanism includes the following components:

* __Queue selection__: A queue is selected according to a round-robin scheduling algorithm. In particular, the 
mechanism uses a modified version of the deficit round-robin (DRR) algorithm.
* __Message dequeuing__. The first (oldest) message of the queue, that satisfies certain conditions is dequeued. A 
  message must satisfy the following conditions:

>     * The message has a ready flag assigned. Ready flag is assigned to a message when all of its parents are eligible (parents have been scheduled or confirmed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * The message has a ready flag assigned. A ready flag is assigned to a message when all of its parents are eligible (the parents have been scheduled or confirmed).
```

    * The message timestamp is not in the future.

> * __Message skipping__. Once a message in the outbox becomes confirmed, that is we receive another message approving it, it gets removed from the outbox buffer. Since the message already has approvers and is supposed to be replicated on enough nodes in the network, it is not gossiped or added to the tip pool, hence "skipped".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* __Message skipping__. Once a message in the outbox is confirmed by another message approving it, it will get removed from the outbox buffer. Since the message already has approvers and is supposed to be replicated on enough nodes in the network, it is not gossiped or added to the tip pool, hence "skipped".
```

> * __Message drop__: Message drop: Due to node's bootstrapping, network congestion or ongoing attacks, the buffer occupancy of the outbox buffer may become large. To keep bounded delays and/or isolate attacker's spam a node shall drop some messages if the total number of bytes in all queues exceeds the maximum buffer size; in particular, messages are dropped from queue with the largest mana-scaled length, computed by dividing the number of bytes in the queue by the amount of access Mana of the corresponding node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* __Message drop__: Due to the node's bootstrapping, network congestion, or ongoing attacks, the buffer occupancy of the outbox buffer may become large. To keep bounded delays and isolate the attacker's spam, a node shall drop some messages if the total number of bytes in all queues exceeds the maximum buffer size. Particularly, the node will drop messages from the queue with the largest mana-scaled length, computed by dividing the number of bytes in the queue by the amount of access Mana of the corresponding node.
```

  following situations:
    - Since the total outbox buffer has a limited size, if the total number of bytes in all queues exceeds the current
      buffer size is smaller than the maximum size. The Mana scaled length of a queue is calculated by dividing the number
      of bytes in the queue by the amount of access Mana of the corresponding node:
    - `Mana-scaled queue size = queue size / node aMana`;

The dequeuing mechanism includes the following components:

* __Queue selection__: A queue is selected according to a round-robin scheduling algorithm. In particular, the 
mechanism uses a modified version of the deficit round-robin (DRR) algorithm.
* __Message dequeuing__. The first (oldest) message of the queue, that satisfies certain conditions is dequeued. A 
  message must satisfy the following conditions:
    * The message has a ready flag assigned. Ready flag is assigned to a message when all of its parents are eligible (parents have been scheduled or confirmed).
    * The message timestamp is not in the future.
* __Scheduler management__: The scheduler counters and pointers are updated.

> #### False positive drop

Reviewer 2: Basically we want to say here that false positive drop is not a problem because dropped messages in the outbox are already booked and confirmation comes eventually due to messages received from the rest of the network which approve the dropped ones.

Author: Changed the description slightly towards the suggestion.

During an attack or congestion, a node may drop a message already scheduled by the rest of the network, causing a  
_false positive drop_. This means that the message’s future cone will not be marked as _ready_ as its past cone is not
eligible. This will be resolved when the rest of the network confirms the message, making it eligible and satisfying
the _consistency_ requirement.

#### False negative drop

> Another possible problem is that a node schedules a message that the rest of the network drops, causing a _false

Reviewer 2: False negative drop is a strange term to me as we're actually not dropping something :)

Author: False positive schedule sounds better?

negative drop_. The message is gossiped and added to the tip pool. However, it will never accumulate enough approval
weight to be _Confirmed_. Eventually, the node will orphan the message node as

> the [Time Since Confirmation check](tangle.md#tip-pool-and-time-since-confirmation-check)  during tip selection will 

Reviewer 2: That's not correct. The TSC will most likely be applied on the future cone of the "false negative message", leading to orphaning that particular subTangle.

Author: Changed the description.

fail.

### Scheduler

Scheduling is the most critical task in the congestion control component. The scheduling algorithm must guarantee that
an honest node `node` meets the following requirements:

* __Consistency__: The node's messages will not accumulate indefinitely at any node, and so, starvation is avoided.
* __Fairness__: The node's fair share of the network resources are allocated to it according to its access Mana.

> * __security__: Malicious nodes sending above their allowed rate will not interrupt a node's throughput requirement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* __Security__: Malicious nodes sending above their allowed rate will not interrupt a node's throughput requirement.
```

implementation of the [FQ-CoDel packet scheduler](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8290), which is based on DRR,
supports anywhere up to 65535 separate queues).

The DRR scans all non-empty queues in sequence. When it selects a non-empty queue, the DDR will increment the queue's
priority counter (_deficit_) by a specific value (_quantum_). Then, the value of the deficit counter is a maximal amount
of bytes that can be sent this turn. If the deficit counter is greater than the weight of the message at the head of the
queue, the DRR can schedule this message, and this weight decrements the value of the counter. In our implementation,
the quantum is proportional to the node's access Mana, and we add a cap on the maximum deficit that a node can achieve
to keep the network latency low. It is also important to mention that the DRR can assign the weight of the message so
that specific messages can be prioritized (low weight) or penalized (large weight); by default, in our mechanism, the
weight is proportional to the message size measured in bytes. The weight of a message is set by the
function `WorkCalculator()`.

> :::note

Reviewer 2: Is this a special markdown directive?

Author: Yes. I think it's for the documentation on the website.

- message
- access mana
- malicious nde
- scheduling

---

# Congestion Control

Every network has to deal with its intrinsic limited resources in terms of bandwidth and node capabilities (CPU and
storage). In this document, we present a congestion control algorithm to regulate the influx of messages in the
network with the goal of maximizing throughput (messages/bytes per second) and minimizing delays. Furthermore, the
following requirements must be satisfied:

* _Consistency_. If a message is written by one honest node, it shall be written by all honest nodes within some
  delay bound.
* _Fairness_. Nodes can obtain a share of the available throughput depending on their access Mana. Throughput is
  shared in such a way that an attempt to increase the allocation of any node necessarily results in the decrease
  in the allocation of some other node with an equal or smaller allocation (max-min fairness).
* _Security_. Malicious nodes shall be unable to interfere with either of the above requirements.

[![Congestion Control](/img/protocol_specification/congestion_control_algorithm_infographic_new.png)](/img/protocol_specification/congestion_control_algorithm_infographic_new.png)

> Further information can be found in the paper [Access Control for Distributed Ledgers in the Internet of Things: A Networking Approach](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.07778).

Reviewer 2: You can also add this link which includes attack analysis https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.10238

## Detailed Design

Our algorithm has three core components:

* A scheduling algorithm which ensures fair access for all nodes according to their access Mana.
* A TCP-inspired algorithm for decentralized rate setting to efficiently utilize the available bandwidth while
  preventing large delays.

> * An algorithm to check Time Since Confirmation of a tip, performed when creating a new message.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this is the right place to introduce this. I would rather mention "a buffer management policy to deal with malicious flows" and move the TSC discussion to the TSA documentation

### Prerequirements

* _Node identity_. We require node accountability where each message is associated with the node ID of its issuing
  node.

* _Access mana_. The congestion control module has knowledge of the access Mana of the nodes in the network in order
  to fairly share the available throughput. Without access Mana the network would be subject to Sybil attacks, which

>   would incentivise even honest actors to artificially increase its own number of nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  would incentivise actors to artificially split (or aggregate) onto multiple identities.
```

> * _Timestamp_. Before scheduling a new message, the scheduler verifies whether the message timestamp is valid or not.

Reviewer 2: Do we do this??

* _Message weight_. Weight of a message is used to priority messages over the others and it is calculated depending

>   on the type of message and of the message length.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  on the type of message and on the message length.
```

  node.

* _Access mana_. The congestion control module has knowledge of the access Mana of the nodes in the network in order to fairly share the available throughput. Without access Mana the network would be subject to Sybil attacks, which would incentivise even honest actors to artificially increase its own number of nodes.
* _Access mana_. The congestion control module has knowledge of the access Mana of the nodes in the network in order
  to fairly share the available throughput. Without access Mana the network would be subject to Sybil attacks, which
  would incentivise even honest actors to artificially increase its own number of nodes.

* _Timestamp_. Before scheduling a new message, the scheduler verifies whether the message timestamp is valid or not.

* _Message weight_. Weight of a message is used to priority messages over the others and it is calculated depending on the type of message and of the message length.
* _Message weight_. Weight of a message is used to priority messages over the others and it is calculated depending
  on the type of message and of the message length.

### Outbox Buffer Management

> ### Outbox Management

Reviewer 2: This section should go after scheduler and rate setter.

> * _Message skipping_. The message is skipped when they are confirmed while still waiting to be scheduled in the

Reviewer 2: What do you mean with "skipped"? It means that, at the moment of scheduling, we check if the message has already been confirmed? Or do we regularly check if messages have been confirmed. This may be an implementation detail though. However, you have to mention what to do when "skipping": do you remove the message from the outbox? Do you keep it there? Else?

* _Message drop_. In some circumstances, due to network congestion or to ongoing attacks, some messages shall be
  dropped to guarantee bounded delays and isolate attacker's messages. Specifically, a node shall drop messages in
  the following situation:
    - since the total outbox buffer is of a limited size, if the total number of bytes in all queues exceeds the
      limit after a new message is enqueued, the oldest messages from longest mana-scaled queues are dropped until the
      current buffer size is smaller than the maximum size. Mana scaled length of a queue is calculated by dividing
      number of bytes in the queue by the amount of access Mana of a corresponding node:
    - `Mana-scaled queue size = queue size / node aMana`;

The dequeue mechanism includes the following components:

* _Queue selection_. A queue is selected according to round-robin scheduling algorithm. In particular, we use a
  modified version of the deficit round-robin (DRR) algorithm.
* _Message dequeuing_. The first (oldest) message of the queue, that satisfies certain conditions is dequeued, and

>   list of active nodes is updated. Conditions a message must satisfy:

Reviewer 2: Is the list of active nodes mentioned elsewhere? Otherwise it's not easy to understand why this is here and what's its function.

>     * Message has a ready flag assigned. Ready flag is assigned when all of its parents have been scheduled or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Message is eligible (ready flag assigned), that is all of its parents have been scheduled or
```

Author: Ready flag is assigned to a message in the scheduler when all of its parents are eligible (are scheduled or confirmed). Those are different.

>       confirmed (are eligible).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      confirmed.
```

    * Message timestamp is not in the future.
* _Scheduler management_. Scheduler counters and pointers are updated.

> During an attack or congestion a node will drop a message, that will be scheduled by the rest of the network (false

Reviewer 2: This and the next paragraph should be rewritten to improve the readability.

the head of the queue, this message can be scheduled and the value of the counter is decremented by this weight. In
our implementation, the quantum is proportional to node's access Mana, and we add a cap on the maximum deficit that a
node can achieve to keep the network latency low. It is also important to mention that the weight of the message can
be assigned in such a way that specific messages can be prioritized (low weight) or penalized (large weight); by
default, in our mechanism the weight is proportional to the message size measured in bytes. The weight of a message
is set by the function `WorkCalculator()`.

Here a fundamental remark: _the network manager sets up a desired maximum (fixed) rate_ `SCHEDULING_RATE` _at which
messages will be scheduled_, computed in weight (see above) per second. This implies that every message is scheduled
after a delay which is equal to the weight (size as default) of the latest scheduled message times the parameter
`SCHEDULING_RATE`. This rate mostly depends on the degree of decentralization desired: e.g., a larger rate leads to
higher throughput but would leave behind slower devices which will fall out of sync.

### Rate Setting

> If all nodes always had messages to issue, i.e., if nodes were continuously willing to issue new messages, the
> problem of rate setting would be very straightforward: nodes could simply operate at a fixed, assured rate, sharing
> the total throughput according to the percentage of access Mana owned. The scheduling algorithm would ensure that
> this rate is enforceable, and that increasing delays or dropped messages are only experienced by misbehaving node.
> However, it is unrealistic that all nodes will always have messages to issue, and we would like nodes to better
> utilise network resources, without causing excessive congestion and violating any requirement.
> 
> We propose a rate setting algorithm inspired by TCP — each node employs [additive increase, multiplicative decrease]
> (https://https://epubs.siam.org/doi/book/10.1137/1.9781611974225) (AIMD) rules to update their issuance rate in
> response to congestion events. In the case of distributed ledgers, all message traffic passes through all nodes,
> contrary to the case of traffic typically found in packet switched networks and other traditional network
> architectures. Under these conditions, local congestion at a node is all that is required to indicate congestion
> elsewhere in the network. This observation is crucial, as it presents an opportunity for a congestion control
> algorithm based entirely on local traffic.
> 
> Our rate setting algorithm outlines the AIMD rules employed by each node to set their issuance rate. Rate updates
> for a node `node` take place each time a new message is scheduled if the `node` has a non-empty set of its own
> messages not yet scheduled. Node `node` sets its own local additive-increase variable `localIncrease(node)` based on
> its access Mana and on a global increase rate parameter `RATE_SETTING_INCREASE`. An appropriate choice of
> `RATE_SETTING_INCREASE` ensures a conservative global increase rate which does not cause problems even when many
> nodes increase their rate simultaneously. Nodes wait `RATE_SETTING_PAUSE` seconds after a global multiplicative
> decrease parameter `RATE_SETTING_DECREASE`, during which there are no further updates made, to allow the reduced
> rate to take effect and prevent multiple successive decreases. At each update, `node` checks how many of its own
> messages are in its outbox queue, and responds with a multiplicative decrease if this number is above a threshold,
> `backoff(node)`, which is proportional to `node`'s access Mana. If the number of `node`'s messages in the outbox is
> below the threshold, `node`'s issuance rate is incremented by its local increase variable `localIncrease(node)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If nodes were continuously willing to issue new messages,rate-setting would not be a problem. Nodes could simply operate
at a fixed, assured rate and share the total throughput according to the percentage of access Mana they own. The
scheduling algorithm would ensure that this rate is enforceable, and only misbehaving nodes would experience increasing
delays or dropped messages. However, it is unrealistic to expect all nodes always to have messages to issue. We would
like nodes to better utilize network resources without causing excessive congestion and violating any requirement.

We propose a rate-setting algorithm inspired by TCP — each node employs [additive increase, multiplicative decrease]
(https://https://epubs.siam.org/doi/book/10.1137/1.9781611974225) (AIMD) rules to update their issuance rate in response
to congestion events. In the case of distributed ledgers, all message traffic passes through all nodes, contrary to the
case of traffic typically found in packet-switched networks and other traditional network architectures. Under these
conditions, local congestion at a node is all that is required to indicate congestion elsewhere in the network. This
observation is crucial as it presents an opportunity for a congestion control algorithm based entirely on local traffic.

Our rate-setting algorithm outlines the AIMD rules employed by each node to set their issuance rate. Rate updates for a
node occur each time a new message is scheduled if the node has a non-empty set of its own messages that are not yet
scheduled. The node sets its own local additive-increase variable `localIncrease(node)` based on its access Mana and a
global increase rate parameter `RATE_SETTING_INCREASE`. An appropriate choice of
`RATE_SETTING_INCREASE` ensures a conservative global increase rate that does not cause problems even when many nodes
simultaneously increase their rate.

Nodes wait `RATE_SETTING_PAUSE` seconds after a global multiplicative decrease parameter `RATE_SETTING_DECREASE`, during
which no further updates are made, to allow the reduced rate to take effect and prevent multiple successive decreases.
At each update, the node checks how many of its own messages are in its outbox queue and responds with a multiplicative
decrease if this number is above a threshold,
`backoff(node)`, which is proportional to the node's access Mana. If the number of the node's messages in the outbox is
below the threshold, the node's issuance rate is incremented by its local increase variable, `localIncrease(node)`.
```

> ### Tip pool and Time Since Confirmation check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tip Pool and Time Since Confirmation Check
```

> When a message is scheduled, it's added to the tip pool, however there are additional actions and checks that need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a confirmed message is scheduled, it is gossiped to the node's neighbors and, normally, added to the tip pool except in the following situations:
```

Author: ```suggestion
When a message is scheduled, it is gossiped to the node's neighbors and, normally, added to the tip pool except in the following situations:
```

> to be performed before a message is added:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

* a confirmed message shall not be added to the tip pool (it shall be skipped by the scheduler)
* a message that has confirmed or scheduled approvers shall not be added to the tip pool

> * strong parents of a message are removed from the tip pool, when the message is added

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, strong parents of a message are removed from the tip pool, when the message is added and unused tips are removed from the tip pool after a certain amount of time.
```

> * after certain amount of time, unused tips are removed from the tip pool

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> When selecting tips from the tip pool an additional check shall be performed to make sure that the timestamp and a

Reviewer 2: See my comment above: I think this should be explained in the TSA spec with more details.

Reviewer: Should I wait for this or can I go ahead and review?

Reviewer: should I wait for this or can I go ahead and review this section as well?

Author: I will move it and then I'll re-request your review.

  is replicated on enough nodes in the network.
* _Message drop_. In some circumstances, due to network congestion or to ongoing attacks, some messages shall be
  dropped to guarantee bounded delays and isolate attacker's messages. Specifically, a node shall drop messages in
  the following situation:
    - since the total outbox buffer is of a limited size, if the total number of bytes in all queues exceeds the
      limit after a new message is enqueued, the oldest messages from longest mana-scaled queues are dropped until the
      current buffer size is smaller than the maximum size. Mana scaled length of a queue is calculated by dividing
      number of bytes in the queue by the amount of access Mana of a corresponding node:
    - `Mana-scaled queue size = queue size / node aMana`;

The dequeue mechanism includes the following components:

* _Queue selection_. A queue is selected according to round-robin scheduling algorithm. In particular, we use a
  modified version of the deficit round-robin (DRR) algorithm.
* _Message dequeuing_. The first (oldest) message of the queue, that satisfies certain conditions is dequeued. A message
  must satisfy the following conditions:

>     * Message has a ready flag assigned. Ready flag is assigned when all of its parents have been scheduled or
>       confirmed (are eligible).

Author: ```suggestion
    * The message has a ready flag assigned. Ready flag is assigned to a message when all of its parents are eligible (parents have been scheduled or confirmed).
```
